



Operations and Management Area Working Group                   A. Méndez
Internet-Draft                                                  D. López
Intended status: Standards Track                              Telefonica
Expires: 20 March 2027                                       J. Lindblad
                                                             All For Eco
                                                       16 September 2026


              Normalized Representation of YANG State Data
          draft-mendez-opsawg-yang-state-normalization-latest

Abstract

   This document defines a normalization procedure for YANG state data.
   The procedure enables structurally equivalent YANG state data to
   produce equivalent normalized representations independently of the
   serialization format and applicable representation conventions.  The
   normalized representation is intended to support comparison, hashing,
   integrity verification, provenance, and other procedures that require
   stable identification of equivalent YANG state data.  This version
   defines a schema-independent normalization profile and assumes that
   sibling ordering is not semantically significant.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at https://ana-
   mp26.github.io/yang-state-normalization/draft-mendez-opsawg-yang-
   state-normalization.html.  Status information for this document may
   be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-mendez-opsawg-
   yang-state-normalization/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Operations and
   Management Area Working Group Working Group mailing list
   (mailto:opsawg@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/opsawg/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/opsawg/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ana-mp26/yang-state-normalization.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 20 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Scope
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Problem Statement
     3.1.  Serialization Differences
     3.2.  Ordering Differences
     3.3.  Operational Use Cases
   4.  Normalization Procedure
   5.  Examples
     5.1.  XML and JSON Representations
   6.  Limitations
   7.  Relationship to Existing Work
   8.  Security Considerations
   9.  IANA Considerations
   10. References
     10.1.  Normative References
     10.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   YANG is widely used to model configuration data, operational state,
   notifications, and other information exchanged between network
   management systems.

   Data modeled using YANG can be represented through different
   serialization formats, including XML, JSON, and CBOR.  Furthermore,
   equivalent YANG-modeled information may be serialized differently by
   distinct implementations due to representation-specific conventions,
   ordering choices, or encoding mechanisms.

   These differences make it difficult to determine whether two
   representations convey the same information.  As a result, operations
   such as datastore comparison, data deduplication, fingerprint
   generation, integrity verification, provenance processing, and
   message-broker compaction often depend on representation-specific
   artifacts rather than on the underlying information itself.

   Existing normalization and canonicalization mechanisms operate at the
   serialization level.  For example, XML, JSON, and CBOR provide
   independent procedures for producing deterministic encodings of
   individual documents.  However, these mechanisms do not address the
   broader problem of obtaining a common representation across different
   serialization formats.

   This document defines a normalization procedure for YANG state data
   that produces a deterministic representation independent of the
   original serialization format.  The procedure enables equivalent
   YANG-modeled information to converge into the same normalized
   representation, providing a stable basis for comparison, fingerprint
   generation, integrity verification, and other operational uses.

   This version defines a schema-independent normalization profile.  The
   procedure does not require access to the corresponding YANG schema
   and assumes that sibling ordering is not semantically significant.

1.1.  Scope

   This document focuses on representation equivalence of YANG-modeled
   data.

   The procedure defined in this document is intended to identify when
   different serialized representations convey equivalent information.

   This document does not define a complete semantic normalization of
   YANG datastore contents.  Schema-specific concepts such as default
   values, identityref resolution, leafref resolution, and ordered-by-
   user semantics are outside the scope of this version and may be
   addressed by future work or versions.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   *  YANG State Data: Information modeled using YANG and represented in
      a serialization format such as XML, JSON, or CBOR.

   *  Representation: A concrete serialized encoding of YANG state data.
      Examples include XML, JSON, and CBOR encodings conveying the same
      underlying information.

   *  Normalized Representation: A deterministic representation
      generated by the normalization procedure defined in this document.

   *  Representation Equivalence: Two representations are
      representation-equivalent when they produce identical normalized
      representations.

   *  Structural Equivalence: The property whereby two representations
      convey the same observable structure and values after
      normalization.

   *  Fingerprint: A cryptographic digest calculated from a normalized
      representation.

   *  Serialization Format: The concrete encoding format used to
      represent YANG state data, including XML, JSON, and CBOR.

   *  Schema-Independent Normalization: A normalization procedure that
      does not require access to the corresponding YANG schema during
      processing.

   *  Semantic Equivalence: The property whereby two representations
      correspond to the same YANG state after considering all schema-
      dependent semantics.

   Semantic equivalence is outside the scope of this document.

3.  Problem Statement

   YANG state data can be represented using multiple serialization
   formats, including XML, JSON, and CBOR.

   Existing normalization and canonicalization mechanisms provide
   deterministic representations within a specific serialization format.
   Examples include XML canonicalization, the JSON Canonicalization
   Scheme (JCS), and deterministic CBOR encoding.

   These mechanisms ensure that a given representation can be
   transformed into a deterministic byte sequence.  However, they do not
   provide a common representation across different serialization
   formats, nor do they address representation variations that may arise
   from implementation-specific choices.

   As a consequence, semantically equivalent YANG-modeled information
   may produce different serialized representations and therefore
   different fingerprints, hashes, or signatures.

   This limitation affects multiple operational scenarios, including
   datastore comparison, provenance verification, message broker topic
   compaction, data synchronization, and content deduplication.

   The objective of this document is to define a normalization procedure
   capable of producing a stable representation of YANG state data
   independently of the original serialization format.

3.1.  Serialization Differences

   YANG state data can be represented using different serialization
   formats, including XML, JSON, and CBOR.

   Existing canonicalization mechanisms operate within a specific
   serialization format and provide deterministic representations of
   individual documents.  Examples include XML Canonicalization (XML-
   C14N), the JSON Canonicalization Scheme (JCS) [RFC8785], and the
   deterministic encoding rules defined for CBOR [RFC8949].

   These mechanisms ensure that a given representation can be
   transformed into a deterministic byte sequence.  However, these
   mechanisms do not provide a common representation across different
   serialization formats.

   For example, the same YANG state data may be represented using XML,
   JSON, or CBOR while conveying equivalent information.  Despite this
   equivalence, the resulting representations differ structurally and
   produce different byte sequences, hashes, and signatures.

   Consequently, direct comparison of serialized data cannot reliably
   determine whether two representations convey the same information.

   A normalization procedure operating above the serialization layer is
   therefore required to enable representation-independent comparison of
   YANG state data.

3.2.  Ordering Differences

   Equivalent YANG state data may be serialized using different ordering
   conventions.

   In many operational scenarios, sibling ordering does not carry
   semantic meaning and may vary between implementations, datastore
   realizations, or serialization processes.

   For example, one implementation may produce:

   <aaa>
     <bbb/>
     <ccc/>
     <ddd/>
   </aaa>

   while another implementation may produce:

   <aaa>
     <ddd/>
     <bbb/>
     <ccc/>
   </aaa>

   Although both representations may convey the same information, they
   result in different serialized structures and therefore different
   hashes, fingerprints, or signatures.

   Such variations may arise from implementation-specific ordering
   choices, internal datastore representations, module augmentations, or
   serialization procedures.

   A representation-level comparison is therefore insufficient to
   determine equivalence of the information being conveyed.

   A normalization procedure should eliminate non-semantic ordering
   differences and produce identical normalized representations for
   equivalent information.

3.3.  Operational Use Cases

   The absence of a representation-independent form of YANG state data
   affects several operational scenarios, including:

   *  *Datastore State Comparison:* Network management systems
      frequently compare datastore snapshots obtained from different
      devices, controllers, or processing stages.  Equivalent YANG state
      data represented through different serialization formats or
      ordering conventions may appear different when compared directly,
      despite conveying the same information.

   *  *Message Broker Applications:* YANG-modeled information is
      increasingly exchanged through message broker infrastructures and
      data distribution systems.  Stable identification of equivalent
      information can support operations such as message deduplication,
      topic compaction, change detection, and content synchronization.

   *  *Data Synchronization and Replication:* Operational environments
      frequently exchange YANG state data between multiple systems.  A
      deterministic normalized representation can simplify state
      comparison, synchronization procedures, and consistency
      verification across distributed environments.

   *  *Data Deduplication:* Storage and processing systems may benefit
      from the ability to identify equivalent information independently
      of the original representation.  A normalized representation
      provides a stable basis for content identification and
      deduplication.

   *  *Provenance and Integrity Verification:* Where stable and
      deterministic representations are required to generate
      reproducible fingerprints, hashes, and signatures, such as the
      previous use cases mentioned.

4.  Normalization Procedure

   The normalization procedure operates on YANG state data independently
   of its original serialization format.

   The procedure transforms XML, JSON, or CBOR representations into a
   common normalized representation through a recursive processing
   algorithm.

   At a high level, the procedure consists of:

   1.  Parsing the input representation.

   2.  Constructing an internal hierarchical representation composed of
       node identifiers, values, and descendants.

   3.  Normalizing identifiers and values.

   4.  Recursively normalizing descendant nodes.

   5.  Eliminating non-semantic ordering differences.

   6.  Generating a deterministic normalized representation.

   The same YANG state information SHOULD produce the same normalized
   representation regardless of the original serialization format.

   XML  ----\
             \
   JSON ----- > Parse Input
             /
   CBOR ----/

                 |
                 v

       Common Representation

                 |
                 v

      Recursive Normalization

                 |
                 v

      Deterministic Ordering

                 |
                 v

     Normalized Representation

                 |
                 v

    Comparison / Fingerprinting

5.  Examples

   This section illustrates how equivalent YANG state data represented
   using different serialization formats can produce the same normalized
   representation.

5.1.  XML and JSON Representations

   The following XML and JSON representations convey equivalent
   information.

   <interface>
     <name>eth0</name>
     <enabled>true</enabled>
   </interface>

   {
     "interface": {
       "name": "eth0",
       "enabled": true
     }
   }

   After applying the normalization procedure, both representations
   produce the same normalized form.

   interface
    ├─ enabled = true
    └─ name = eth0

6.  Limitations

   This version intentionally focuses on schema-independent
   normalization.

   The following aspects are outside the scope of this version:

   *  ordered-by-user semantics;

   *  default value handling;

   *  identityref resolution;

   *  leafref resolution;

   *  full semantic equivalence of YANG datastore states.

   Future versions may define schema-aware normalization profiles that
   address these aspects.

7.  Relationship to Existing Work

   The normalization procedure defined in this document ismintended to
   complement existing efforts related to themprocessing,
   identification, and distribution of YANG-modeled information.

   The YANG provenance mechanisms defined in
   [I-D.ietf-opsawg-yang-provenance] operate on serialized
   representations of YANG data and can benefit from a stable,
   representation-independent normalization procedure capable of
   producing equivalent representations across different serialization
   formats.

   Similarly, work related to message broker identification and key
   generation for YANG-modeled information, such as
   [I-D.ietf-nmop-yang-message-broker-message-key], may benefit from a
   normalization procedure that produces stable representations for
   equivalent information independently of their original encoding.

   This document does not modify or replace such mechanisms.  Instead,
   it provides a potential foundation that can be used by higher-level
   procedures requiring stable identification of equivalent YANG state
   data.

8.  Security Considerations

   The normalization procedure defined in this document is intended to
   provide a deterministic representation of YANG state data.  It does
   not, by itself, provide integrity, authenticity, confidentiality, or
   provenance guarantees.

   Security properties may be obtained by applying appropriate
   mechanisms, such as cryptographic hash functions, digital signatures,
   or provenance procedures, to the resulting normalized representation.
   Implementations relying on the normalized representation for
   integrity verification or provenance applications MUST use
   cryptographically secure algorithms appropriate for the intended use
   case.  Incorrect normalization procedures may result in different
   representations producing the same normalized output or in equivalent
   information producing different normalized representations.  Such
   situations may negatively affect comparison, fingerprint generation,
   and verification procedures.  This version assumes that sibling
   ordering is not semantically significant.  Applying the procedure to
   data where ordering carries semantic meaning may produce incorrect
   equivalence results.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-nmop-yang-message-broker-message-key]
              Graf, T., Elhassany, A., Feng, A. H., Claise, B., and P.
              Lucente, "YANG Message Keys for Message Broker
              Integration", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              ietf-nmop-yang-message-broker-message-key-02, 2 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-nmop-
              yang-message-broker-message-key-02>.

   [I-D.ietf-opsawg-yang-provenance]
              Lopez, D., Pastor, A., Feng, A. H., Pérez, A. M., and H.
              Birkholz, "Applying COSE Signatures for YANG Data
              Provenance", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              opsawg-yang-provenance-07, 6 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-opsawg-
              yang-provenance-07>.

   [RFC8785]  "JSON Canonicalization Scheme (JCS)", n.d..

   [RFC8949]  "Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR)", n.d..

Acknowledgments

   This document is based on work partially funded by the EU Horizon
   Europe projects CYBERNEMO (grant 101168182) and 3C4AI (grant
   101298630).

Authors' Addresses

   Ana Méndez
   Telefonica
   Email: ana.mendezperez@telefonica.com


   Diego López
   Telefonica
   Email: diego.r.lopez@telefonica.com


   Jan Lindblad
   All For Eco
   Email: jan.lindblad+ietf@for.eco
